https://picsum.photos/536/354

The Rising Battle between Artificial Intelligence and the Radiologists.
Hearing Artificial intelligence the first thing that comes into mind is that of a being who is as capable as us, human being, and together with the advantage of not having the worldly problems and biological lacking that human kind possesses. The science fictions that we had read in our earlier life may have some factor of contribution toward this bias. But again, when we face some things new and potentially evolutionary, we tend to overhype it, as it has happened also in this case of Artificial Intelligence, we are still riding the peak of Gartner’s hype cycle and hoping to hit the plateau of productivity in near future.  
  
Over the past few decades, the application of Artificial Narrow Intelligence has been witnessed in a gradual but overpowering manner in many branches and among them computer vision, deep learning algorithms are the major frontrunners. These AI methods excel at automatically recognizing complex patterns in imaging data and providing quantitative, rather than qualitative, assessments of radiographic characteristics [1]. As a result it has a tremendous potential to immensely contribute in the healthcare system, especially in the radiology department.
Reflecting on the history, Wilhelm Roentgen was able to take the first X-ray in 1895 by passing electric currents through a tube and by doing so, was able to figure out how to turn this experiment into an X-ray. This ability to take X-ray was a huge advancement in the medical community because it allowed for the diagnosis of fractures, broken bones, ailments and much more. Shortly after discovery of X-ray, machines were produced and the technology of X-ray became a commonly used diagnostic procedure in the medical community and that marks the emerging of the radiologist job in the current world of healthcare. Since then, with the invention of X-ray, CT scan and MRI the job of radiologists have undergone evolutionary changes.
Now-a-days this view of the radiologist as a physician who adds value to the health care system by generating and interpreting diagnostic images is quite outdated. In the last three decades, the radiologists’ responsibility have expanded heavily to encompass economic gatekeeping, political advocacy, public health delivery, patient safety, quality of care improvement, and information technology. It is through these roles that radiologists still continue to find new ways to add value to the healthcare system [2]. So, we can say that, the radiologists are also evolving. But the question is will they be able to keep AI at bay to save their jobs?
Let’s delve into how AI is progressing. As of today there are myriad of technologies related to Artificial Intelligence are being published in research journals. The figure below is the visualization of this exponential growth of AI research in medicine. Although the number of papers in Web of Science is more than that in Scopus, both showed a similar trend over the study period. The number of publications has increased exponentially since 1998, and most of the papers were published in the period of 2008–2018 [3].
 
But, there is a big difference between technology article getting published and technology getting approved by proper administrative authority like FDA. Comparing to the number of articles, it is obvious that the number of technology that are FDA approved is glaringly low. But technology innovation companies like Philips, Siemens  are setting the early trend to materialize the limited scope of AI application, like instead of making application which detect all type of fractures, making application which only detect wrist fracture. Moreover, many AI technologies are getting approved for improving triage (the assignment of degrees of urgency to wounds or illnesses to decide the order of treatment of a large number of patients or casualties) in healthcare system. But the number is surely picking its pace. 
The first FDA approval was granted in the year 2016, with three approvals at the end of the year 2017. Most FDA approvals were granted in the year 2018, with 13 (44.8%) approvals, while 10 (34.4%) and 2 (6.9%) approvals were granted in 2019 and 2020 up until February [4]. A short overview of such FDA approved medical devices and algorithms can be found in the infographic image below:
 

So, who will be the best performer in radiology department of healthcare, AI or the Radiologists? It is a question that future will best answer. But let’s keep in mind the battle between Chase grand master Garry Kasparov and IBM super computer Deep Blue. In 1997, the Chase grandmaster was beaten by the computer system, but the grandmaster said he could have performed better if he had access to the same database as Deep Blue. So later, in 2014, matches were organized in which supercomputers could play against human chess players assisted by AI (they were called human/AI centaurs). The AI chess players won 42 games, but centaurs won 53 games [5].
Therefore, we can tell in the end that, as AI can improve a chess player, it can surely improve a Radiologist in doing his job and for that neither AI nor the radiologists, but the consensus of radiologists and AI will prevail. It is the demand of modern time that the radiologist should incorporate their traditional ways of diagnosis with the features of AI and integrate AI into the clinical practices.



[1] (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6268174/)
[2] (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2600889/)
[3] (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6463262/)
[4] https://www.nature.com/articles/s41746-020-00324-0





